Before they got into politics, Ben Carson and Carly Fiorina excelled in widely different fields: medicine for Carson, the computer business for Fiorina. But as presidential candidates, they have both been defined — and limited — by the same set of skills.

They are masters of the attack line.

Carson, a pioneering black neurosurgeon, began his political career by attacking President Obama’s health-care law — with Obama sitting nearby — at a prayer breakfast in 2013. Carson has since called the law “the worst thing to have happened in this nation since slavery.”


Fiorina, a pioneering female chief executive, already tried a political career. But then she lost a decisive, and expensive, election for a U.S. Senate seat from California. This year, however, Fiorina has resuscitated that career by attacking the most prominent woman in the presidential race: former secretary of state Hillary Rodham Clinton.

“Hillary Clinton must not be president of the United States — but not because she’s a woman,” she told a cheering crowd in Iowa recently. “Hillary Clinton cannot be president of the United States because she is not trustworthy.”

Key moments from Ben Carson's 2016 announcement(3:01)
Republican neurosurgeon Ben Carson hosted a choir singing an Eminem cover and vowed not to be "politically correct" at the event announcing his run for president in 2016. Here are those key moments and more. (AP)
On Monday, both Carson and Fiorina announced that they are running for president.

They will be powerful new voices in the race because they can articulate many Republicans’ frustrations with Obama and Clinton and — because of who they are — can blunt a Democratic counterattack that galls conservatives deeply. Which is that their frustrations with Obama and Clinton are just racism and sexism, endlessly repackaged.

The hard part, for both Carson and Fiorina, will be when they want to be more than just a voice in the race.

If they actually want to win, both will have to expand far beyond the role of punch-thrower.

And both will have to avoid the gaffes, rattling skeletons and policy blind spots that have doomed past outsider candidates, from Ross Perot to Herman Cain. The last non-politician to win a major party’s presidential nomination was Dwight D. Eisenhower (R) in 1952 — and that’s hardly a comparable case, since Eisenhower’s service in World War II had made him a national icon even before he ran.


As of now, polls show that — among these two outsiders — Carson is in a stronger position than Fiorina.

In March, a Washington Post-ABC News poll showed him with the support of 6 percent of GOP primary voters. With the electorate divided among a number of candidates, that’s not bad, actually. It puts him in the middle of the pack: In South Carolina and Iowa, that kind of number puts Carson in the top six.

Carly Fiorina: 'Why is Carly running for president?' | Campaign 2016(1:04)
Carly Fiorina announces she will seek the 2016 Republican presidential nomination. (CarlyforPresident.com)
The bad news, for Carson, is that more recent surveys have shown his standing tick down as other, professional GOP politicians have formally announced that they are running.

On Monday, in his announcement, Carson sought to expand his political persona by returning to his personal story. He was raised by a single mother, graduated from Yale and the University of Michigan medical school, and became the youngest director of pediatric neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, the first black person to hold the position.

In a video that played before Carson spoke, Carson’s message seemed to be that, if he became president, he could imbue the country with the qualities that underlie his personal success.

“Healing requires a leader with calm, unwavering resolve,” the video said. “We have the fortitude to heal, the imagination to inspire, and the determination to revive our American dream.”

For Fiorina, the bad news is her poll numbers: She gets only about 1 percent support among Republicans nationally. Even in this race, that’s low.

The good news is that a lot of people don’t know her yet: About three in five Republican-leaning voters had no opinion of Fiorina in a Monmouth University poll last month. And in a recent swing through Iowa, Fiorina attracted unexpectedly large crowds, more than 100 at some events.

“Where did she come from?” Kim Hiscox of West Des Moines asked a Post reporter after seeing Fiorina speak. “I must be under a rock or something, because tonight is the first time I’ve heard her name. I’m so impressed that maybe the Republicans could put forward a woman to challenge Hillary.”

In her own announcement video, Fiorina stayed close to the attack line that had revived her career. The video begins with Fiorina watching Clinton’s own announcement video — then raising her TV remote and turning it off.

“If you believe that it’s time for citizens to stand up to the political class and say, ‘Enough,’ then join us,” Fiorina said. “We can do this, together.”
